<pre>
  BIP: Tapscript Leaf Version 0xC2
  Layer: Consensus (soft fork)
  Title: Post-Quantum Signature Algorithms
  Authors: conduition <conduition@proton.me>
           Ethan Heilman <1ethan.r.heilman@gmail.com>
           Mikhail Kudinov <m.kudinov@tue.nl>
           Oleksandr Kurbatov <olkurbatov@gmail.com>
           Jonas Nick <jonas@n-ck.net>
  Status: Draft
  Type: Specification
  License: BSD-3-Clause
  Created: 2026-04-07
  Version: 0.0.1
  Requires: 340, 341, 342, 360
</pre>

==Introduction==

===Abstract===

This BIP introduces a softfork via Tapscript leaf version 0xC2, which redefines OP_CHECKSIG to support cryptographic agility through algorithm flags attached to public keys. This BIP specifies two such flags: <code>0x02</code>to verify BIP340 Schnorr signatures and the <code>0x01</code> to verify SHRINCS signatures. Reserved flags are defined as always-succeed paths, so that new signature verification algorithms may be added in the future. It also lifts the 520-byte stack element size limit within this leaf version to 6000 bytes.

===Copyright===

This document is licensed under the 3-clause BSD license.

==Motivation==

Bitcoin’s security rests on the computational hardness of the elliptic curve discrete log problem (ECDLP) over secp256k1. Shor’s algorithm, running on a cryptographically relevant quantum computer (CRQC), can solve ECDLP in polynomial time, breaking both ECDSA and Schnorr signatures. The timeline for a CRQC remains uncertain, but the trend is toward shorter estimates. Whether a CRQC arrives in 2030 or 2040 (or never), Bitcoin must be prepared before it arrives; migration under duress is far riskier than proactive preparation.

===Why Hash-Based Signatures===

Among PQ signature families, hash-based schemes occupy a unique position: Their security relies solely on the security of the underlying hash function. This is, arguably, the most conservative and well-studied assumption available. In conditions where acceptance of a cryptographic signature requires a network-wide soft fork, conservatism in cryptographic assumptions is the most significant decision parameter.

One can also construct the shortest suitable Post-Quantum sig+pub schemes (among lattice-, hash-based, and multivariate schemes) using hash-based designs.

This conservative nature permits a long-term strategy of cryptographic agility for Bitcoin holders: By committing to hash-based public keys alongside keys of a more “risky” algorithm inside the leaves of a script tree, a Bitcoin user may retain the usage benefits of the risky scheme and the robust security of the hash-based scheme. This technique can hedge against cryptanalytic breakthroughs over the scale of decades.

===Why SHRINCS===

NIST-standardized SLH-DSA (the standardized version of SPHINCS+) produces a stateless signature ranging from 7856 bytes (SLH-DSA-SHA2-128s) at the 128-bit classical security level. In the Bitcoin context, where each witness byte affects the transaction fees and consumes scarce block space, these sizes are painful for routine/regular transactions. SHRINCS addresses that through a hybrid stateful+stateless design:

* Stateful mode: uses an XMSS tree where each signature consists of a single WOTS+C signature and a Merkle authentication path. Shallow-depth XMSS leaves have short authentication paths while deeper leaves have longer ones. This permits constructions with very short signatures - as small as XXX bytes (with the XMSS leaf at depth 1) - at the cost of the burden of tracking state.
* Stateless mode (fallback): uses a variant of SLH-DSA (FIPS-205) with a smaller parameter set, producing a 5776-byte signature.
* The single public key: the scheme presumes a single public key - a 48-byte structure which commits to both stateful and stateless components.

While larger than the stateful mode, a SHRINCS stateless signature is still 2 kilobytes smaller than SLH-DSA-SHA2-128s. It is used in the case the signer's state is lost, corrupted, or intentionally reset (e.g. after seed recovery). The stateless path guarantees that keys remain usable even if state is lost, at the cost of an expensive and large signature.

===Design Rationale: Unified Scheme vs. Separate Opcodes===

An alternative approach would be to redefine <code>OP_SUCCESS</code> codes specifically for SHRINCS, without changing the tap leaf version. While this was considered for a while, redefining <code>OP_CHECKSIG</code> was preferable for a number of reasons:

* New signature algorithms may need to be added in the future. With our approach of parameterizing <code>OP_CHECKSIG</code> to accept algorithm flags, new signature verification algorithms can be added by simply defining a new algorithm flag. Whereas if we were to set a precedent by redefining <code>OP_SUCCESS</code> opcodes, new sets of opcodes would need to be redefined for every new algorithm, and they would not interoperate well.
* New opcodes involving signature verification may be added in the future, such as <code>OP_CHECKSIGFROMSTACK</code> (BIP-0348), and a unified approach makes inter-BIP compatibility easier to engineer. If this BIP is deployed first, then BIP-0348 could be updated to support the new tapscript version by following the algorithm flag system defined in this BIP. Conversely, if BIP-0348 is deployed first, then this BIP could be updated to also redefine <code>OP_CHECKSIGFROMSTACK</code> in the new tap leaf version <code>0xC2</code>.

An even more segregated approach would be to deploy XMSS and SPHINCS+ as independent algorithms, so that they may be placed in separate tapscript leaves. This is a more flexible construction, which allows the user to combine spending paths as they will, but SHRINCS takes a unified approach for the following reasons:

* <b>Simpler wallet integration</b>: a single opcode with a single public key and a mode flag is easier to integrate into wallets than several independent signature algorithms, which have to be coordinated.
* <b>Multisignature complexity</b>: With SPHINCS and XMSS as separate algorithms, a threshold multisignature script must handle the combinatorial explosion of each signer potentially using their stateful or stateless key.

===Design Rationale: Hybridization===

There exist <i>signature combiners</i> such as Bird-of-Prey<ref>[https://eprint.iacr.org/2025/1844]</ref> which allow efficient hybridization of classical and post-quantum signature schemes. A hybrid scheme is at least as secure as either of the two base schemes, requiring successful attacks on both base schemes to be considered vulnerable as a whole. With a well-designed combiner, one can achieve stronger security notions than naive signature and public key concatenation. Well-designed signature combiners like BoP also reduce overall signature size compared to a naive combiner because the verifier can recover or reuse some components of the signature.<ref>[https://delvingbitcoin.org/t/bird-of-prey-2-non-malleable-schnorr-pq-signatures/2514]</ref>

In this proposal we elect <b>not</b> to introduce a dedicated hybrid signature scheme combiner for Schnorr+SHRINCS, for a few reasons:

* <b>Redundancy.</b> Deploying SHRINCS as a standalone signature scheme is desirable for efficient quantum-safe spending of bitcoin. If standalone SHRINCS is available, users will already have access to hybridization techniques by using hybrid scripts.
* <b>Lack of value.</b> Strong unforgeability - one of the main selling points of using a combiner - is not security-critical in Bitcoin because segregated witnesses don't affect TXIDs. At best a hybrid scheme would provide a minor ~5%-10% improvement in witness size over a naive scripting approach, and this is still less efficient than keeping keys compartmentalized in isolated spending paths.
* <b>Complexity & fragility.</b> A hybrid scheme would necessitate new Schnorr signing sub-algorithms, because combiners like Bird-of-Prey don't use Schnorr as a black-box. This greatly expands the scope of implementation.
* <b>Security.</b> Standalone SHRINCS uses strictly weaker cryptographic assumptions than BIP340, so adding hybridization with Schnorr hedges only against implementation flaws or state reuse in SHRINCS. Both risks can already be effectively mitigated using formal code verification and cautious wallet design.

We thus conclude that deploying a unified hybrid scheme would not offer justifiable value to Bitcoin users, and comes at the expense of great risk and effort in adding a bespoke new signature algorithm, which very few people would use because of the cheaper options available, such as placing public keys for each algorithm in isolated leaf scripts in P2MR.

Users who do find value in hedging against state reuse or implementation flaws in SHRINCS may do so using explicit multisignature scripts which verify each signature algorithm individually.


<!--

TODO: Remove this section if/when SLH-DSA is used without customization.

===SLH-DSA compatibility===

SHRINCS diverges from the SLH-DSA specification in three ways:
* it uses WOTS+C instead of the standard WOTS+
* it uses PORS+FP instead of FORS
* it reduces the number of supported signatures to 2^x

These modifications, detailed in Kudinov and Nick<ref>Kudinov, Nick, ''Hash-based Signature Schemes for Bitcoin'', [https://eprint.iacr.org/2025/2203].</ref>, yield approximately xx% smaller stateless signatures (xxxx bytes vs. approximately xxxx bytes for an equivalent FORS/WOTS+ configuration). In the system where each byte costs fees, and we are limited by a constant block size, a signature size reduction isn’t marginal; it directly affects the lower transaction costs and higher throughput.

TODO: copy the image from the google doc

The modifications are well-analyzed. Compression techniques don’t introduce any vulnerabilities compared to SLH-DSA. The reduced amount of available signatures is aligned with the practical need:
* On-chain usage:
* Off-chain usage:

-->

==Specification==

===Overview===

This BIP defines a new tapscript leaf version <code>0xC2</code>, in which all signature verification opcodes, such as <code>OP_CHECKSIG</code>, <code>OP_CHECKSIGADD</code>, <code>OP_CHECKSIGVERIFY</code>, etc, are redefined to support multiple signature schemes. The exact verification algorithm to use is dictated at evaluation time, via a 1-byte algorithm flag prefix on the public key arguments.

* <code>OP_CHECKSIG</code>: Pop two elements from the stack: a pubkey, followed by a signature. Fail the script if the pubkey is empty. Pop a 1-byte signature algorithm flag from the pubkey. Verify the signature against the public key using the designated algorithm. Verification is presumed successful for any unrecognized algorithm flag. Push the result: <code>1</code> on success, the empty vector on an empty signature, and fail the script if signature verification fails.

* <code>OP_CHECKSIGVERIFY</code>: Pop two elements from the stack: a pubkey, followed by a signature. Fail the script if the pubkey is empty. Pop a 1-byte signature algorithm flag from the pubkey. Verify the signature against the public key using the designated algorithm. Verification is presumed successful for any unrecognized algorithm flag. Fail the script if signature validation fails, or if the signature is empty.

* <code>OP_CHECKSIGADD</code>: Pop three elements from the stack: a pubkey, followed by a CScriptNum <code>n</code>, followed by a signature. Fail the script if the pubkey is empty or if the CScriptNum is larger than 4 bytes. Pop a 1-byte signature algorithm flag from the pubkey. Verify the signature against the public key using the designated algorithm. Verification is presumed successful for any unrecognized algorithm flag. Push the result: <code>n</code> if the signature is empty, or <code>n+1</code> if the signature is valid. Fail the script if signature verification fails.

Threshold (m-of-n) and multi (n-of-n) signatures are realized by combining <code>OP_CHECKSIGADD</code> with existing arithmetic <code>OP_ADD</code> and <code>OP_NUMEQUAL</code> opcodes, following the same pattern used in BIP342. Since each pubkey commits to its own algorithm, a multisignature script may consist of multiple keys using disjoint verification algorithms, and each signer need not care which algorithm their peers use.

In all other aspects, tapscript version <code>0xC2</code> is identical to the original tapscript version <code>0xC0</code> defined in BIP342.

TODO: the above spec needs careful proofreading.

===Parameters===

TODO: include references to the spec documents.


===Public Key Format===

When CHECKSIG opcodes pop a non-empty pubkey from the stack, the verifier assumes the pubkey byte vector has the following structure:

<pre>
flag || pubkey
</pre>

… where <code>flag</code> is a byte corresponding to a standardized signature verification algorithm flag.

Two verification algorithm flags are defined in this BIP:

* <code>0x01</code>: SHRINCS.
* <code>0x02</code>: BIP340<ref>By using <code>0x02</code> as the algorithm flag for a BIP340 pubkey, the key appears the same as it would if we took the full lifted secp256k1 curve point and encoded it with the standard compressed point encoding format.</ref>.

Any pubkey which uses an unidentified algorithm flag prefix is essentially an “anyone-can-spend” public key, because verifiers will auto-succeed when they validate signatures against that key. This allows future BIPs to define new verification algorithms using a soft-fork.

We now define the signature verification algorithms for these two flags.


===SHRINCS===

A SHRINCS public key is a 48-byte string constructed as:
<pre>
PK = PK.seed || PK.sf_root || PK.sl_root
</pre>

* <code>PK.seed</code> is a domain separator, used in all hash operations while producing the signature.
* <code>PK.sf_root</code> is a root commitment to a stateful XMSS public key.
* <code>PK.sl_root</code> is a root commitment to a stateless SPHINCS public key.


====Signature Format====

SHRINCS signatures can exceed the 520-byte limit for stack elements. Therefore, the new tapscript version <code>0xC2</code> introduced in this BIP lifts the 520 byte limit on stack element sizes to 6000 bytes.

SHRINCS signatures may either use the stateful or the stateless path inside the key, and either is equally valid. Stateless SHRINCS signatures are very large, but always a constant size of 5776 bytes. Stateful SHRINCS signatures are much shorter, but are of variable size, to a maximum of XXX bytes.


====Stateful Signature Layout====

A SHRINCS stateful signature consists of

- An XMSS node address
- A 16-byte randomizer
- A WOTS+C signature
- A merkle authentication path

Unlike P2MR and P2TR script trees, XMSS requires explicit left/right direction in the structure of its merkle tree for security.<ref>Can we still prove XMSS secure if we use an unstructured (directionless) tree, a la taproot? (better privacy and XMSS clients are more flexible) No. Unstructured XMSS trees would give an attacker an advantage in multi-target attacks. Say you have an XMSS tree with height two (i.e. four leaves). Let’s say you reveal the two intermediate nodes in the first layer to an attacker, e.g. by signing a transaction. The hash function used to compute both of these nodes must be the same - otherwise it would not be a directionless tree - So the attacker can try preimage search on both hash function outputs at once. This doubles their chances of successfully finding a preimage. Scaled up, with more target hashes, the attacker increases their advantage even more.</ref> The XMSS node address is necessary for the verifier to be able to correctly follow the Merkle authentication path back to the <code>PK.sf_root</code> hash.

We use a node address encoding of 9 bytes: 1 byte for the node depth, and 8 bytes for the node index. This allows the signer to specify any position in the XMSS tree, to a maximum depth of 255, and a maximum index within a layer of 2<sup>64</sup> - 1. This permits both balanced and unbalanced XMSS constructions, or a combination thereof. For guaranteed security we recommend using only balanced or unbalanced trees.

TODO: should we use a variable-size encoding for the node index in the serialized signature? Seems like 99% of use-cases will have a very low index, so we have a lot of ways to optimize here.

* Unbalanced XMSS is where the XMSS tree is "leaned over" to one side. Each node has a WOTS leaf and a child branch which also has one leaf and a child, and so on. The number of WOTS leaves is the depth of the tree plus 1.
** Very small signatures initially, but signature size increases with repeated use.
** Key generation and signing are very fast.
** Ideal for use-cases where very few signatures per keypair are needed, e.g. On-chain Bitcoin wallets that avoid reusing addresses.
* Balanced XMSS is where the branches of the XMSS tree are perfectly balanced, with some power-of-two number of WOTS leaves all at the same depth.
** Small, constant-size signatures. Not as small as unbalanced XMSS.
** Key generation becomes very performance-intensive for deeper trees.
** Signing is fast if sufficient memory is available to cache the leaves of the XMSS tree.
** Ideal for use-cases where large numbers of constant-size compact signatures must be made quickly, from the same keypair.

The SHRINCS stateful verifier does not distinguish between balanced or unbalanced XMSS. The verifier cannot distinguish the shape of the signer's XMSS tree beyond what is implied by the presence of WOTS leaves at the node addresses specified in published signatures.

<!--
Use cases for BXMSS:
  - high-security custody, exchanges, etc.
  - hardware wallet fallback keys (static SHRINCS key embedded in an xpub-like structure)
  - static donation addresses
  - for multi-party transaction protocols (constant-size signatures make fee estimation easier)
Cons:
  - Verifier becomes more complex to implement.
  - Wallets can be more easily fingerprinted if they use custom XMSS tree structures.
-->

The stateful path uses a WOTS+C signature because this offers a very compact signature with a constant-time verifier. TODO explain more on WOTS vs WOTS+C and why we use both.


====Stateless Signature Layout====

The stateless path uses SLH-DSA with a modified parameter set.

We could have used a modified set of algorithms too, which would have improved signature size by as much as 15% and improved code reusability, but this would come at the cost of breaking compatibility with NIST-compliant SLH-DSA implementations. Introducing new algorithms would also mandates a new security proof. By reusing SLH-DSA, we can lean on existing infrastructure, hardware, software, and security arguments.

Still, we achieve a 25% reduction in signature size and a ~33% improvement in signing and verification performance compared to SLH-DSA-SHA2-128s by accepting a reduction in signature budget from 2<sup>64</sup> to 2<sup>40</sup>.

To achieve this, the only material change we have made from the SLH-DSA specification in FIPS-205 is the parameter set. This is a relatively minor modification. Upstream SLH-DSA implementations could become compatible with SHRINCS' stateless component by simply enabling this new parameter set; They need not rewrite code specifically for SHRINCS unless they wish to also support the stateful spending path.


====SigOp Budget====
====Single Signature Pattern====
====Threshold Signature Pattern====
==== Execution ====





==Backward Compatibility==

Existing script semantics in P2WSH and other legacy address formats is unaffected. This BIP only affects P2TR and P2MR tapscript that are using leaf version <code>0xC2</code>.

==Security==

The basic script validation rules of the new tapsript version <code>0xC2</code> are mostly inherited from BIP342. The only novel addition is the algorithm flag parsed by the CHECKSIG family of opcodes, so we will focus on that.

The algorithm flag is adjoined as part of the pubkey in this design. Pubkeys are typically committed as part of locking scripts, and so an attacker will usually not be able to control which algorithm will be used by the verifier. This rules out any “rollback” attacks where an adversary could trick a verifier into using the wrong algorithm - e.g. to interpret a SHRINCS public key as a BIP340 key, or vice versa. This design also makes the security argument easier: To modify the signature algorithm, you must be able to modify the pubkey that a user commits coins to, and if you can modify a pubkey that a user commits coins to, you can already forge signatures and steal coins. Though, in a possible future where OP_CAT or OP_SLICE are re-enabled, poorly-written scripts could be manipulated and future developers will need to bear this risk in mind when designing protocols.

For forwards-compatibility, reserved algorithm flags are left as auto-success paths, which could be a security risk if wallets misuse them. This should not affect any wallet that uses standardized algorithms to generate public keys. Selecting the correct algorithm flag for your keypair is straightforward and easy to validate by inspecting scripts visually.

This BIP specifies two signature algorithm flags: BIP340 and SHRINCS. The BIP340 signature algorithm is already a well-studied secure signature protocol, so we leave discussion of its security to BIP340, and focus instead on the novel hash-based cryptosystem SHRINCS, introduced in this BIP.

The SHRINCS verification algorithm consists mostly of evaluating a series of hash functions on the signature to recompute a certain hash. Ultimately the verifier recomputes one of the SHRINCS public key components: <code>PK.sf_root</code> or <code>PK.sl_root</code>.

The security of SHRINCS relies solely on the security of the underlying hash function, which seems very robust in general. Given a hash function with output width of <code>b</code> bits (given a big enough internal state), the best-known classical attack is simple trial-and-error, which yields a second preimage after 2<sup>b</sup> tries on average. The best case quantum attack using Grover’s algorithm yields a second preimage in time on the order of O(2<sup>b/2</sup>). In other words, using a <code>b</code>-bit hash gives <code>b</code> bits of classical security, and <code>b/2</code> bits of quantum security.

While the definition of quantum security bits is less clear, the classical analogue is well-studied. The elliptic curve discrete log problem, which BIP340 relies upon, can be solved classically in time O(sqrt(n)), where <code>n</code> is the order of the curve. The secp256k1 curve order is an approximately 2<sup>256</sup> bit number, thus the BIP340 algorithm has around 256/2 = 128 bits of classical security against forgery and key recovery.

Having no concrete basis on which to select a level of quantum security against Grover’s algorithm, we aim for SHRINCS to match BIP340’s level of classical security, and so follow the NIST-I security level guidelines: 128 bits of classical security, and 64 bits of quantum security. We do so by using a 128-bit truncation of the SHA256 hash function to instantiate SHRINCS, and this mirrors the NIST FIPS-205 specification’s reasoning for their SLH-DSA-SHA2-128 hash-based parameter sets.<ref>Readers may wonder why we can use 128-bit hash functions safely here, when the rest of Bitcoin depends on 256-bit hashes. This is because most of the usage of hash functions in Bitcoin depends on collision resistance for security, and collisions in a <code>b</code>-bit hash function can be found in only 2<sup>b/2</sup> attempts classically, due to the birthday “paradox”. In SHRINCS we do not need collision resistance, so we can get away with much smaller hash functions.</ref> We use SHA256 because it is already part of Bitcoin consensus, because hardware optimization techniques are readily available, and because if collision resistance of SHA256 is broken, then many other features of Bitcoin will also be compromised anyway.

===Statefulness===

SHRINCS introduces a novel paradigm to Bitcoin, which is the concept of a stateful signature algorithm.

* Discuss novel paradigms of stateful signature schemes.
** Prescribe best practices for stateful wallet devs
** Encourage fallback to stateless path if in doubt
* Explain SPHINCS parameter set choice and compare to NIST-standardized sets with absolute benchmarks: keygen/sign/verify SHA256 compression calls, plus compare key and sig sizes.
** Privacy footnote: Multiple parameter sets would be a footgun. Devs could misunderstand or misuse them, and would degrade privacy for the entire network as wallet fingerprinting would be even easier.
* Discuss upper sig limit parameter of SPHINCS security and explain our choice of this parameter.
** Extrapolate the ‘max repeated signing lifetime’ using a worst-case single-signer scenario.
** Graph the signature overuse security degradation curve.
* Mention how quantum security bits are difficult to empirically measure. Unclear if 64 bits of quantum security is acceptable. TODO: find that link to DJB’s critique of NIST….


==Relaxing the Max Stack Element Size==

The <code>0xC2</code> leaf version relaxes the limit on stack element size from 520 bytes to 6000 bytes. This section describes why this change is necessary, and how to mitigate the risks associated with larger stack elements.

SHRINCS signature size varies widely - between xxx and 5776 bytes. The signature size is chosen by the signer and can't be statically determined from the public key alone. This presents a challenge when deploying SHRINCS on-chain because the legacy tapscript version <code>0xC0</code> restricts stack elements to a maximum size of 520 bytes which SHRINCS signatures may overrun.

To understand why the stack element size limit must be relaxed, let us first consider how we'd need to implement SHRINCS if we worked around the 520-byte stack element size limit in legacy tapscript.

Signatures which exceed the 520 byte limit would need to be broken up into smaller <i>chunks</i> of at most 520 bytes, to be attached to the transaction witness field. When a node validates the transaction, these chunks must be popped & concatenated by the <code>CHECKSIG</code> family of opcodes (and any future opcodes which check signatures, e.g. <code>CHECKSIGFROMSTACK</code>) during script evaluation <i>before</i> verifying the signature. There are several ways one might do this.

First, the <code>CHECKSIG</code> opcodes could parse the leading 520b of the signature from the top stack item and use this to determine how long the signature should be, and thus how many stack elements must be popped. This is undesirable, because (1) the script interpreter cannot treat signatures as a black box anymore, and (2) we may open the door to transaction introspection, as the script interpreter must parse and react dynamically to the internal contents of a signature, which is itself bound to the transaction. We would like to maintain a tight scope in our proposal and avoid inadvertently introducing such edgecase behavior with SHRINCS, and so we discard this option out of caution.

Second, and perhaps more attractively, we could explicitly provide <code>CHECKSIG</code> opcodes with the number of signature chunks to pop, by passing an additional witness element as input. This is more stable but still we face many complex problems.

* <b>Static analysis</b>. We would be introducing the first tapscript opcode which pops a variable number of elements from the stack, and that variable number is not typically fixed by the script-pubkey (as it was in legacy <code>OP_CHECKMULTISIG</code>). Instead the spender can control this, making static script analysis much harder.
* <b>Inefficiency</b>. We'd need one extra witness element encoding the number of signature chunks, which would consume 2 witness bytes in the TX witness field. For every sig-chunk larger than 252 bytes, we require three more witness bytes to specify the stack element length with a CompactSize int<ref>https://learnmeabitcoin.com/technical/general/compact-size/</ref>. The final smallest chunk may be less than 252 bytes, and so would require at least a 1 byte CompactSize. This works out to an additional witness size overhead of $3 \cdot \lfloor \frac{5776}{520} \rfloor + 1 = 34$ bytes for a stateless signature, and at most $3 \cdot \lceil \frac{546 + 16n}{520} \rceil$ bytes for a stateful signature at depth $n$.
* <b>Complex off-chain verification</b>. Off-chain verifiers (e.g. PSBTs, lightning nodes) can no longer just extract a signature from the witness field of a signed TX and verify it. They must duplicate the consensus logic to parse and concatenate signature chunks before the full reconstructed signature can be verified. Verifiers must contend with potential adversarial chunking.
* <b>Complex edgecases</b>.
** We must handle situations where some of the signature chunks are smaller than 520 bytes.
** Some scripts that work fine today would be vulnerable if an attacker could dynamically specify how many stack elements to pop (e.g. by popping a pubkey and replacing it with one of their own).
** Other signature schemes like Schnorr never need signature chunking behavior; How do we handle them?
* <b>Precedence</b>. From a more philosophical perspective, it is generally bad practice to allow untrusted witness data to tell a verifier how to parse and verify it. A common class of vulnerability originates from this anti-pattern. Deploying SHRINCS with chunked signatures sets a questionable precedent for subsequent new signature algorithms and other upgrades to follow the same path.

For these reasons, we elect instead to relax the 520-byte stack element size limit to 6000 bytes, permitting any size of SHRINCS signature to be represented as a single stack element as in Schnorr/ECDSA, and resolving all the above problems.

However, by doing so, we do introduce several new problems - Namely the risk of denial-of-service (DoS) attacks.

Our main DoS concern with raising the stack element size limit would be that someone could construct a script which duplicates and/or hashes a very large (6000-byte) stack element many times to consume CPU and/or memory on verifying nodes at relatively low cost. The spender only needs to pay for the script and the initial large stack element.

* <b>Memory attack</b>. The tapscript stack depth limit is 1000 elements<ref>https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0342.mediawiki#user-content-Resource_limits</ref>, so with a relaxed stack element size limit of 6000, the stack could theoretically consume at most 6 megabytes of memory with the script <code><big_data> OP_DUP OP_2DUP OP_3DUP OP_3DUP ...</code>. This memory consumption occurs because the current implementation of <code>OP_DUP</code> simply duplicates raw bytes in memory <ref>https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/4f348c2d730ce167d2918727aa2fdb6849182ab1/src/script/interpreter.cpp#L799</ref>.
* <b>CPU attack</b>. <code>OP_RIPEMD160</code> is by far the slowest hash function opcode available in consensus due to lack of hardware acceleration for the RIPEMD160 hash function. Without mitigations, a script like <code><big_data> OP_DUP OP_2DUP OP_3DUP OP_RIPEMD160 OP_DROP OP_RIPEMD160 OP_DROP OP_RIPEMD160 OP_DROP OP_3DUP ...</code> could quickly consume a lot of CPU power on the verifying node, while the spender only has to pay for the cost of the 6kb stack element as an up-front cost. Beyond that, the spender only needs to pay for about 7 witness-discounted bytes per triplet of OP_RIPEMD160 opcodes which the verifier executes. When hashing a 6000-byte message, RMD160 runs 94 compressions. So the total cost to the verifier measured in terms of RMD160 compressions, as a function of the spender's witness byte cost $s$ would be: $c(s) = 94 \cdot \frac{3}{7} (s - 6000)$. At a fee rate of 1 sat/vbyte, a spender could pay a few dollars in mining fees to force the entire Bitcoin network to run hundreds of thousands of RMD160 compressions each.
* <b>Hybrid attack</b>. Attackers could combine the above attacks to consume both memory & CPU simultaneously, e.g. with <code><big_data> OP_DUP OP_2DUP OP_3DUP OP_3DUP OP_3DUP ... OP_RIPEMD160 OP_DROP OP_RIPEMD160 OP_DROP ...</code>.

We evaluated three potential solutions to the above attacks.

# <b>Restriction</b>. Forbid <code>DUP</code> opcodes and/or hash opcodes like <code>OP_RIPEMD160</code> from accepting stack elements larger than 520 bytes as input.
# <b>Caching</b>. When verifying a transaction, a node maintains an evicting cache with a fixed max capacity, which maps hash function inputs to outputs. Since CPU attacks rely on reusing the same hash input over and over, this would nullify the performance penalty which nodes endure from repeated hashing and duplication. At most, a verifier would evaluate each of the 3 scriptable hash functions (SHA1, SHA256, RIPEMD160)<ref>https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Script#Crypto</ref> once on any given stack element input; All further hash invocations on that input would hit a cache.
# <b>Pointers</b>. Node implementations can represent stack elements with pointers or other reference types, so duplication of stack elements is cheap. <i>Care would need to be taken to avoid shared-pointer mutation or use-after-free.</i>

Option (1) addresses both CPU and memory DoS attacks, and doesn't change the status quo from tapscript version <code>0xC0</code>. However, it would affect legitimate script authors' ability to work with SHRINCS signatures on the stack the way they can with Schnorr/ECDSA today. It is unclear if use-cases exist for duplicating and/or hashing signatures in script.

Options (2) and (3) are pure implementation changes, and have no practical effect on script authors. Together, they address both CPU and memory DoS attacks. To circumvent the hash-cache mitigation, the attacker would either need to pay for the cost of distinct 6000-byte inputs, or mutate an initial 6000-byte stack element in script (without making it meaningfully smaller) to trigger a cache-miss, and force the verifier to recompute its hash. The former would be expensive, and the latter is not possible under the current Bitcoin scripting environment. Note the attacker could implement a hash-chain in script, e.g. <code>OP_RIPEMD160 OP_RIPEMD160 OP_RIPEMD160 ... OP_RIPEMD160 OP_EQUAL</code>,  each hash operation would indeed be a cache miss, but only the first hash operation will invoke the full 94 compressions.

Thus in possession of viable implementation-level mitigations (which are desirable to implement even before this proposal), we opt to relax the stack element size generally, and permit hashing/duplication opcodes to operate on any stack element up to the new limit of 6000 bytes.

Note that if <code>OP_CAT</code>, <code>OP_XOR</code>, or any other opcodes which permit mutation of stack elements are enabled, then the caching and pointer mitigations may not suffice; Specific restrictions on duplication and hashing opcodes may be necessary.


==Performance==

* Note how SPHINCS verification is fast but keygen and signing are slow.
* XMSS signing and keygen are relatively fast depending on tree depth. Verification is very fast (probably faster than ECDSA, TODO fact check).
* Mention [https://conduition.io/code/fast-slh-dsa-verification/ verification speed benchmarks] and [https://conduition.io/code/fast-slh-dsa/ CPU/GPU optimizations for signing/keygen]
* Possible link to fallback HD wallet standardization BIP which amortizes SLH-DSA keygen overhead to a one-time setup cost. [https://hackmd.io/OMxD8JjmSJ-8q6QueWbiDg Link to draft BIP].
* Mention root tree caching technique for high-frequency signers like LN.

==Reference implementation==

==Test Vectors==

==Related Work==

==Footnotes==

<references/>

==Changelog==

==Acknowledgements==

* Mike Casey

==Discussion Items==

# Whether to lift/loosen the 520-byte stack element size limit
